README.md, before:

# UnNoiseCompile
A repository for developing _scalable_ and hardware-aware quantum compilation to minimise bitflip gate and measurement noise.

## Folder Structure

Much of this repository is built on proper management of experimental data gathered from probe circuits to be used on QPUs. As such, folder management and organistaion is crucial. The following is strongly suggested to ensure that the functions run smoothly without too much manipulation of subfolders:

```text
Project_Root/
│
│
├── setup.py                   <-- setup.py describing the version, dependencies, etc.
│
│
├── notebooks/
│   ├── notebook1.ipynb
│   └── notebook2.ipynb        <-- Any notebooks to run scripts, gather AWS data, inference, etc.
│
├── src/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── splitmeasfilter.py     <-- Measurement Error & Inference
│   └── splitgatefilter.py     <-- Gate Error & Inference, Incorporating Measurement Errors from splitmeasfilter.py
│
├── data/
│   ├── meas_cal/              <-- Output folder for MeasFilter
│   └── gate_exp/              <-- Output folder for GateFilter
│
└── results/                   <-- Final plots and reports
```

## Getting Started
\
Built using Python 3.11.14, mostly using Jupyter notebooks in `/notebooks` and `/scripts/` and Python modules in `/src`. To make a .venv: 

`python3.11 -m venv .venv`

Activate:

`source .venv/bin/activate`

Then install packages:

`pip install -r requirements.txt`

To allow access to the `src/` folder for scripts, run the following to allow python to recognise the `__init__.py` and `setup.py` files already present:

`pip install -e .`

And run from there!

## The Workflow

### 1. Measurement Data

You can either supply probing bitstring data into the `SplitMeasFilter` class directly, using an array-like parameter called `data`, filled with bitstrings, or by placing a csv file named `Filter_data.csv` in the path defined by the `file_address` parameter. If both are given, the class will use the `data` object.

The script is designed to run inference on data gathered from an expected |000...000> state and an expected |111...111> state individually. This will allow the inference of bitflip error rates in both directions (both towards and away from the ground-state)


```python
from src.splitmeasfilter import SplitMeasFilter

# Define Qubits and Data/Path
qubits = [0, 1, 6]

# 1a. Define directory containing `Filter_data.csv`
meas_path = './data/meas_cal/'

# 1b. Or we can Define an array-like object of the same bitstring data
meas_data = ['011110','111110','110110','010010','111111','111101','110100',...]

# 2a. Instantiate Data (from `Filter_data.csv` file)
meas_filter = SplitMeasFilter(qubit_order=qubits, file_address=meas_path)

# 2b. Instantiate Data (from array-like `meas_data` object)
meas_filter = SplitMeasFilter(qubit_order=qubits, data=meas_data)
```
\
We can then run inference on this data. Ensure that you track the number of shots, as this will divide the total into several batches, each of size 'shots_per_point':

```python
# Applying the meas_filter.inference() function
# on batches of size shots_per_point
# The 'prep_state' variable can be '0' or '1', defining either
# |000...000> or |111...111> to infer either error in measuring |0> or |1>

meas_filter.inference(nPrior=40000,          # Number of tested error rates
                        prior_sd=0.1,        # The sd of the prior distribution
                        shots_per_point=1024,# Number of shots in each batch
                        seed=28,             # Seed for the rejection sampling
                        prep_state='0')      # Prepared state (for |0> or |1>)
``` 
\
This will produce files `State0_Post_Qubit0.csv`, `State0_Post_Qubit1.csv`, and `State0_Post_Qubit6.csv`, which contain the posterior distributions of measurement errors, in the form of rejection-sampled error rates. This will output plots of observed data against the posterior model. To reproduce these, along with the distribution statistics, and optionally save, run:
```python
meas_filter.error_distributions(plotting=True, save_plots=True)
```
And this will produce the error rate variables in the `MeasFilter` class. The following gives the `p(0|0)` error rate for Qubit0:
```python
meas_filter.post_marginals['Qubit0']['0']
```

### 2. Gate Data

#### 2a. Designing a Testing Circuit

It is not a trivial problem to design an efficient circuit to test 2-qubit gates. If the _Controlled-Z_ gate is the native 2-qubit gate (as for most superconducting QPUs at the time of writing in January of 2026), there is no direction to the gate, so _CZ[Q1-Q2]_ is the same as _CZ[Q2-Q1]_, so we need only test every connection between qubits. However, the superconducting qubits are arranged in somewhat complex arrangements on a cartesian grid, with a maximum connectivity of any qubit being 4. We need to construct 4 circuits, where each _CZ_ connection is tested in at least one of these circuits.

As this problem is equivalent to the maximal edge-colouring problem from graph theory, there are many algorithms which have been developed to efficiently generate solutions to this exact problem, 'colouring' each connection at least once, and if possible, multiple times. Using graph theory, we can also say that since the qubits are arranged on a grid, it is a bipartite graph, and thus by König's Theorem it is class 1, and only 4 circuits (and not 5) are required (for this idea, see Vizing's Theorem).

**The** `graphconnector.py` **script and its `AdvancedGraphSolver` class is an implementation using Kempe Chains and graph reordering to produce valid data aand maximise data quality and efficiency.**

| | |
|:---:|:---:|
| <img src="resources/Emerald0.png" width="400" /> | <img src="resources/Emerald1.png" width="400" /> |
| <img src="resources/Emerald2.png" width="400" /> | <img src="resources/Emerald3.png" width="400" /> |

| | |
|:---:|:---:|
| <img src="resources/Ankaa-3_0.png" width="400" /> | <img src="resources/Ankaa-3_1.png" width="400" /> |
| <img src="resources/Ankaa-3_2.png" width="400" /> | <img src="resources/Ankaa-3_3.png" width="400" /> |

| |
|:---:|
| <img src="resources/Ankaa-3Text.png" width="400" /> |


#### 2b. Inference 

After gathering data from a circuit applying the same gate to each qubit a set number of times, using the SplitGateFilter class, the gate error can be inferred. The data should be placed into the directory marked by `data_file_address`, with the files named as `Readout_{gate_num}{gate_type}Q{QubitNumber}.csv`.

```python
from src.splitgatefilter import SplitGateFilter

# 1. Setup
gate_path = './data/gate_exp/'
# "meas_path" must match the folder used in Step 1

# 2. Instantiate
# Note: data_file_address is often used for both I/O in the current script. 
# Ensure raw gate data (Readout_) is inside 'gate_path'.
gate_filter = SplitGateFilter(interested_qubits=[0],
                              gate_num=100,
                              gate_type='X',
                              work_dir='./results',
                              data_file_address=gate_path,
                              meas_cal_dir=meas_path)

```

Note the three folders. `work_dir` is the folder where the final results are placed, all plots, all posterior distribution arrays, etc. `data_file_address` contains all the measured gate data, and `meas_cal_dir` contains the calibrated informative priors.


To run inference based on the informed measurement error posteriors, we run the following

```python
gate_filter.inference(nPrior=40000, 
                        meas_sd=0.1,
                        gate_sd=0.01,
                        seed=127,
                        shots_per_point=1024,
                        use_informed_priors=True,
                        plotting=True)

```

Produces `State0_Post_Qubit0.csv` etc. Also produces with the variables:
`gate_filter.post['Qubit0']` -- The full $40000 \times 3$ posterior matrix.
`gate_filter.means['Qubit0']` -- The average error rates [Meas0, Meas1, Gate].

To output the fidelity of qubit, both towards and from the ground state, along with the gate error, return `gate_filter.mean()['Qubit0']` or similar for any number Qubit.

### Plotting

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import scipy.stats as ss

# Access the Gate Error Column (Index 2)
gate_errors = gate_filter.post['Qubit0'][:, 2]

# Create KDE
kde = ss.gaussian_kde(gate_errors)
x_axis = np.linspace(min(gate_errors), max(gate_errors), 200)

# Plot
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 5))
plt.plot(x_axis, kde(x_axis), color='purple', label='Posterior Gate Error')
plt.fill_between(x_axis, kde(x_axis), color='purple', alpha=0.2)
plt.title("Characterized Gate Error (With Informed Measurement Priors)")
plt.xlabel("Gate Error Rate")
plt.ylabel("Density")
plt.legend()
plt.show()
```

### Denoising

It is difficult and often intractable to denoise using the gate bitflip errors, the best method would be to compile the least noisy gates, to minimise errors. 

However, an efficient denoiser of **measurement error** in polynomial time is possible is here developed for use of cleaning quantum bitstring outputs to better estimate the final quantum state. To denoise, run:

```python
from src.splitmeasfilter import SplitMeasFilter

qubits = [0,1,...]
meas_filter = SplitMeasFilter(qubit_order=qubits, file_address='./data/meas_cal')

data_example = {
    "000": 100,
    "001": 50,
    "010": 75,
    "011": 25,
    "111": 1,
}

# Here the eff_DeNoise() will take a dictionary of bitstrings and counts, as with `data_example` and return denoised data dict
# `verbose` gives continual confirmation, GD gives an overkill gradient descent error mitigation technique,
# with lr the learning rate, and max_iter giving the maximum GD iterations
denoised_date = meas_filter.eff_DeNoise(datadict=data_example, percentage=100, verbose=True, GD = False, lr=0.1, max_iter=50)
```

Commit message:

Refine denoising section in README.md
Updated descriptions for denoising methods and clarified usage of eff_DeNoise function.

README.md, after:

# UnNoiseCompile
A repository for developing _scalable_ and hardware-aware quantum compilation to minimise bitflip gate and measurement noise.

## Folder Structure

Much of this repository is built on proper management of experimental data gathered from probe circuits to be used on QPUs. As such, folder management and organistaion is crucial. The following is strongly suggested to ensure that the functions run smoothly without too much manipulation of subfolders:

```text
Project_Root/
│
│
├── setup.py                   <-- setup.py describing the version, dependencies, etc.
│
│
├── notebooks/
│   ├── notebook1.ipynb
│   └── notebook2.ipynb        <-- Any notebooks to run scripts, gather AWS data, inference, etc.
│
├── src/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── splitmeasfilter.py     <-- Measurement Error & Inference
│   └── splitgatefilter.py     <-- Gate Error & Inference, Incorporating Measurement Errors from splitmeasfilter.py
│
├── data/
│   ├── meas_cal/              <-- Output folder for MeasFilter
│   └── gate_exp/              <-- Output folder for GateFilter
│
└── results/                   <-- Final plots and reports
```

## Getting Started
\
Built using Python 3.11.14, mostly using Jupyter notebooks in `/notebooks` and `/scripts/` and Python modules in `/src`. To make a .venv: 

`python3.11 -m venv .venv`

Activate:

`source .venv/bin/activate`

Then install packages:

`pip install -r requirements.txt`

To allow access to the `src/` folder for scripts, run the following to allow python to recognise the `__init__.py` and `setup.py` files already present:

`pip install -e .`

And run from there!

## The Workflow

### 1. Measurement Data

You can either supply probing bitstring data into the `SplitMeasFilter` class directly, using an array-like parameter called `data`, filled with bitstrings, or by placing a csv file named `Filter_data.csv` in the path defined by the `file_address` parameter. If both are given, the class will use the `data` object.

The script is designed to run inference on data gathered from an expected |000...000> state and an expected |111...111> state individually. This will allow the inference of bitflip error rates in both directions (both towards and away from the ground-state)


```python
from src.splitmeasfilter import SplitMeasFilter

# Define Qubits and Data/Path
qubits = [0, 1, 6]

# 1a. Define directory containing `Filter_data.csv`
meas_path = './data/meas_cal/'

# 1b. Or we can Define an array-like object of the same bitstring data
meas_data = ['011110','111110','110110','010010','111111','111101','110100',...]

# 2a. Instantiate Data (from `Filter_data.csv` file)
meas_filter = SplitMeasFilter(qubit_order=qubits, file_address=meas_path)

# 2b. Instantiate Data (from array-like `meas_data` object)
meas_filter = SplitMeasFilter(qubit_order=qubits, data=meas_data)
```
\
We can then run inference on this data. Ensure that you track the number of shots, as this will divide the total into several batches, each of size 'shots_per_point':

```python
# Applying the meas_filter.inference() function
# on batches of size shots_per_point
# The 'prep_state' variable can be '0' or '1', defining either
# |000...000> or |111...111> to infer either error in measuring |0> or |1>

meas_filter.inference(nPrior=40000,          # Number of tested error rates
                        prior_sd=0.1,        # The sd of the prior distribution
                        shots_per_point=1024,# Number of shots in each batch
                        seed=28,             # Seed for the rejection sampling
                        prep_state='0')      # Prepared state (for |0> or |1>)
``` 
\
This will produce files `State0_Post_Qubit0.csv`, `State0_Post_Qubit1.csv`, and `State0_Post_Qubit6.csv`, which contain the posterior distributions of measurement errors, in the form of rejection-sampled error rates. This will output plots of observed data against the posterior model. To reproduce these, along with the distribution statistics, and optionally save, run:
```python
meas_filter.error_distributions(plotting=True, save_plots=True)
```
And this will produce the error rate variables in the `MeasFilter` class. The following gives the `p(0|0)` error rate for Qubit0:
```python
meas_filter.post_marginals['Qubit0']['0']
```

### 2. Gate Data

#### 2a. Designing a Testing Circuit

It is not a trivial problem to design an efficient circuit to test 2-qubit gates. If the _Controlled-Z_ gate is the native 2-qubit gate (as for most superconducting QPUs at the time of writing in January of 2026), there is no direction to the gate, so _CZ[Q1-Q2]_ is the same as _CZ[Q2-Q1]_, so we need only test every connection between qubits. However, the superconducting qubits are arranged in somewhat complex arrangements on a cartesian grid, with a maximum connectivity of any qubit being 4. We need to construct 4 circuits, where each _CZ_ connection is tested in at least one of these circuits.

As this problem is equivalent to the maximal edge-colouring problem from graph theory, there are many algorithms which have been developed to efficiently generate solutions to this exact problem, 'colouring' each connection at least once, and if possible, multiple times. Using graph theory, we can also say that since the qubits are arranged on a grid, it is a bipartite graph, and thus by König's Theorem it is class 1, and only 4 circuits (and not 5) are required (for this idea, see Vizing's Theorem).

**The** `graphconnector.py` **script and its `AdvancedGraphSolver` class is an implementation using Kempe Chains and graph reordering to produce valid data aand maximise data quality and efficiency.**

| | |
|:---:|:---:|
| <img src="resources/Emerald0.png" width="400" /> | <img src="resources/Emerald1.png" width="400" /> |
| <img src="resources/Emerald2.png" width="400" /> | <img src="resources/Emerald3.png" width="400" /> |

| | |
|:---:|:---:|
| <img src="resources/Ankaa-3_0.png" width="400" /> | <img src="resources/Ankaa-3_1.png" width="400" /> |
| <img src="resources/Ankaa-3_2.png" width="400" /> | <img src="resources/Ankaa-3_3.png" width="400" /> |

| |
|:---:|
| <img src="resources/Ankaa-3Text.png" width="400" /> |


#### 2b. Inference 

After gathering data from a circuit applying the same gate to each qubit a set number of times, using the SplitGateFilter class, the gate error can be inferred. The data should be placed into the directory marked by `data_file_address`, with the files named as `Readout_{gate_num}{gate_type}Q{QubitNumber}.csv`.

```python
from src.splitgatefilter import SplitGateFilter

# 1. Setup
gate_path = './data/gate_exp/'
# "meas_path" must match the folder used in Step 1

# 2. Instantiate
# Note: data_file_address is often used for both I/O in the current script. 
# Ensure raw gate data (Readout_) is inside 'gate_path'.
gate_filter = SplitGateFilter(interested_qubits=[0],
                              gate_num=100,
                              gate_type='X',
                              work_dir='./results',
                              data_file_address=gate_path,
                              meas_cal_dir=meas_path)

```

Note the three folders. `work_dir` is the folder where the final results are placed, all plots, all posterior distribution arrays, etc. `data_file_address` contains all the measured gate data, and `meas_cal_dir` contains the calibrated informative priors.


To run inference based on the informed measurement error posteriors, we run the following

```python
gate_filter.inference(nPrior=40000, 
                        meas_sd=0.1,
                        gate_sd=0.01,
                        seed=127,
                        shots_per_point=1024,
                        use_informed_priors=True,
                        plotting=True)

```

Produces `State0_Post_Qubit0.csv` etc. Also produces with the variables:
`gate_filter.post['Qubit0']` -- The full $40000 \times 3$ posterior matrix.
`gate_filter.means['Qubit0']` -- The average error rates [Meas0, Meas1, Gate].

To output the fidelity of qubit, both towards and from the ground state, along with the gate error, return `gate_filter.mean()['Qubit0']` or similar for any number Qubit.

### Plotting

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import scipy.stats as ss

# Access the Gate Error Column (Index 2)
gate_errors = gate_filter.post['Qubit0'][:, 2]

# Create KDE
kde = ss.gaussian_kde(gate_errors)
x_axis = np.linspace(min(gate_errors), max(gate_errors), 200)

# Plot
plt.figure(figsize=(8, 5))
plt.plot(x_axis, kde(x_axis), color='purple', label='Posterior Gate Error')
plt.fill_between(x_axis, kde(x_axis), color='purple', alpha=0.2)
plt.title("Characterized Gate Error (With Informed Measurement Priors)")
plt.xlabel("Gate Error Rate")
plt.ylabel("Density")
plt.legend()
plt.show()
```

### Denoising

It is difficult and often intractable to denoise using the gate bitflip errors, the best method would be to compile qubits to utilise their least noisy connections, and gates, thus minimising errors. 

However, a kind of efficient denoiser of **measurement error** in polynomial time is possible, by assuming that measurement error is not correlated (thus, ignoring cross-talk). Such a method is here developed for use of denoising quantum bitstring outputs to better estimate the final quantum state. To denoise a given dictionary of bitstring counts, infer the measurement error rates using the SplitMeasFilter class along with gathered data, and  run the following:

```python
from src.splitmeasfilter import SplitMeasFilter

qubits = [0,1,...]
meas_filter = SplitMeasFilter(qubit_order=qubits, file_address='./data/meas_cal')

data_example = {
    "000": 100,
    "001": 50,
    "010": 75,
    "011": 25,
    "111": 1,
}

# Here the eff_DeNoise() will take a dictionary of bitstrings and their counts, as with `data_example`, and return a denoised data dictionary
# `verbose` gives continual confirmation, GD gives an overkill gradient descent error mitigation technique,
# with lr the learning rate, and max_iter giving the maximum GD iterations
denoised_date = meas_filter.eff_DeNoise(datadict=data_example, percentage=100, verbose=True, GD = False, lr=0.1, max_iter=50)
```
